I've been reading a lot about military history recently.
And one way to paint the picture of browsers,
internet browsers is through the various wars throughout its history.
I don't know if that's a useful way to look at it,
but we've already talked a little bit about Netscape and, and I'd explore, uh,
in the early days.
Can you tell the story of the different wars if that's at all an interesting way
to look at it of the nineties and to today? Yeah.
So I mentioned that Microsoft, you know, which was convicted at four,
it did abuse its monopoly,
but they had a pretty good team by the time they did it for and Netscape.
Unfortunately,
I was like the second floor and I was friends with all the first floor people,
the front end guys who did the JavaScript event, hookup and things like that.
Um, that that team was fairly burnt out. And I think, uh,
having gone public, uh, the man upper management,
wanted to buy a bunch of companies to try to go head to head with Microsoft
didn't work, but buying a bunch of companies usually doesn't work.
I think the modern sort of approach it roughly is like mark Zuckerberg,
uh, took, which is to keep them at arms length and let them do their thing.
And now that he's pulling WhatsApp in and people are fleeing it because it's
tied into the ad surveillance. But, um, you know,
for awhile they're keeping it separate,
really does work because you bought it for its value.
It's complimentary and you're not messing with it with Netscape.
When they bought a bunch of companies,
they had some of the first four people or the founders burned out. They had, um,
newcomers who wanted their turn to do the browser and they hadn't really
done browsers or understood them.
And so Netscape four was originally supposed to be three and it was so late.
They renumbered it.
We did a three release Jamie and a few others put some extra effort into a
secure mine was supported in the mail, a built in mail program.
Um, and that's K four was late and it was only on windows at first.
And Microsoft had really started doing better. Like they do, they copy.
And the first version is trash. And the second one,
you're starting to feel a little threatened. The third one,
you can tell what's going to happen in the fourth. One's.
Good. And plus, there's the benefit of,
like you said that it comes as a default browser. Yeah.
And,
and yet Netscape screwing it up and Microsoft really putting some quality people
on it. I, four was good on windows. It was good.
And they did the dynamic HTML innovations, the, uh, Scott Isaac's,
my old buddy,
a former accountant who programmed in basic and became what the Microsoft calls
a program manager, which is kind of an elevated position. It's, um,
you can be a program or an engineer track,
but you switched to it and you sort of lead a lot of design and standards
efforts. And so Scott has put in a lot of those, uh,
funky D HTML API APIs that didn't quite have the same flavor as the stuff that I
did. And neither of them was like the later sort of verbose Java, like Tom,
let me three C standardized, but I for it was pretty darn good. We,
I remember a friend Scott Fermin, and I got invited by Scott Isaacs to, uh,
Gordon beers in San Jose.
They were doing a preview of [inaudible]. This must have been 1997. And Scott
says, yeah, we've got, here's the new graphics
stuff we're doing. We've got something like your Netscape layers. Um,
we've got VML, vector, markup language, you know, we can do like virtual reality. And Scott and I looked
at each other and said, we're doomed, right
. Microsoft was starting to fire on all cylinders. So I have to give them
credit for that, even though they abused their market power. And
maybe I shouldn't give him credit for having the resource
to hire talented people, but they did a credible job on I four
. What really was bad was that phase of the browser wars ended with monopoly and perhaps due to the
anti-trust case, perhaps due to regulation Europe, um,
perhaps just due to Microsoft, not liking, dealing with standardization, they w they let it rot. They just abandoned it. I 5, 5, 5
, um,
I six later, but these were not well-maintained. They had a lot of security bugs.
Browse really closed and outdated too, even though it's getting updated,
it's just weird.
Browsers, like Mozilla and Firefox. We're adding tabs.
Opera had a version of tabs and, uh,
they didn't add tabs and they pop up blocking something I should have done from
the start.
People realize that you can tell when the user clicks something and it goes to
in JavaScript to open a little window that you can sort of inspect the stack and
see that the click originated that. And that's probably okay.
Whereas if you're just loading a script and it opens a new window,
that's a spam technique and you should block.
It. Tabs were brilliant innovation, like you said, opera had it. But like,
I remember I fully switched to Firefox the moment it was.
I remember like the moments of first using tabs and Firefox and like
not liking it, like for the first few minutes. And then like, wait a minute.
You get the groove. Yeah. You get the groove.
And you understand mean, so that timing, w what year was this? Uh, because,
uh, also as a aspiring web designer, I use table.
So we would have mentioned layout or CSS points.
There's also a change in the way, like the frames were going away. Yeah.
So there's a change in the way websites looked and behavior and all that kind of
stuff.
Finally, which Microsoft embraced with IFR and Netscape, and there really did,
right. Uh,
CSS became a better standard over time for doing table layout that
relieved you of the need to use what are called spacer gifts, spacer gifts,
right. Images you would throw into space up tables. Um, you know, the,
the type of graphic power of the web has gotten better,
but it's still not on the level of PDF and you can't do advanced typography,
but, um, it's gotten really better. And even then tables were getting better.
If you were using Firefox, that would have been 2004,
because it was called Firebird until really that, you know, I think, uh,
it wasn't 12, three.
I don't remember. It was a fiber which had tabs.
Yeah. We had tabs the whole way. So it was the less,
less browser it became in 2002, became Phoenix.
There's a bios that has an embedded of IIE. And they said,
we're called Phoenix technologies. You can't use Phoenix. And so we said, okay,
we'll call it Firebird.
And then this Australian centered open source database project started really
like in the true Madmax stout,
just screaming at us saying you can't use Firebird.
And I had to sort of be the ambassador. And I said, okay,
we're going to rename it. We don't believe ideation. They used that.
We hate you. And then we renamed it to Firefox. And they're like, ah,
we love you. And then I don't, haven't heard of them ever since,
but Firefox was a clever name. We had to think of something distinctive.
We wanted to keep the fire going. And it turns out there's a red Panda, right.
It's a nickname for.